---
layout: post
title: "Jetpacks"
---


{% include JB/setup %}

## Demo
[http://dabbler0.github.io/up/index.html](http://dabbler0.github.io/up/index.html)

## Conception
  Jetpack games are like platformers, except when you jump you don't hit-test the ground. I wanted to do a jetpack game that emphasized care and caution, kind of the antithesis of a shoot-em-up.

<!--more-->

## Tech
  It's going to be a static browser game, written in CoffeeScript on the HTML5 canvas.

## Hack
 i Foundational stuff: we need a Sprite class, collision detection redraw function. We'll have standard gravity, friction, and key-to-force controls. Done with no issues.

  I'm going to make the game something like the classic moon lander game -- if you hit the ground too hard, you lose (or lose health). I like the visual effect that some games have had with shaking the screen when an impact happens, so I'll do that -- it'll be a basic canvas matrix transformation. I'll put some bars at the top for health and fuel. Fuel will decrease whenever there is a force from key-to-force.

  Now to add a goal to the game -- it'll just be a coin-collection game. At first I thought about having coins be the score, but the game was a bit too easy. So instead there's a "hunger" mechanic -- if you don't collect a coin fast enough you lose. A simple square sprite represents the coin and is randomly positioned every time you eat it. The hack went pretty smoothly and the game is done.

  A couple gameplay tweaks. First, although I like the elegant modern look of label-less status bars, nobody understands what they mean, so I need to add some labels. Second, for no real reason whatsoever, I decided to make the coin have randomized size.

  Great, the game is done. I want to make a variant that's more action-packed and less frustrating. So the idea is that you're a jetpacker but you have a gun and you can shoot. However, I was less than fifteen minutes into this hack when I realized that the bullets graphic would better serve as an exhaust graphic. So I went back to the original game and added these.

  I made a couple other variants of the game (originally called Up), Down and Out, which use the same gameplay mechanics. Down forbids you from touching the ground (you have to collect coins in sequence, and coins refuel); Out is a scrolling game about exploration that never really came to fruitition, but that's okay as well.

  In the future I will probably use some library to make these games, like Phaser, which sound promising.

## Launch
  It's static files, so I just used Github Pages for hosting.
