---
layout: post
title: "Entrap"
tags:
- games
- multiplayer
- browser
- coffeescript
- html5_canvas
- websockets
- heroku
---

{% include JB/setup %}

## Demo
[http://entrap.herokuapp.com](http://entrap.herokuapp.com)

## Conception
  I wanted to turn [Tron Lightcycles][tron] (a turn-based, discrete game) into a more human-friendly game (real-time, continuous). The game will look the same from both sides, so both players think they are red, and the board is rotated 180 degrees between players.

<!--more-->

## Tech
  It's a webapp. The frontend is going to be in CoffeeScript, running on the HTML5 canvas. It's real-time, so we'll want to use websockets.

## Hack
  First couple lines were to get a one-player, WASD/arrow keys bit working, to the point where the two paths can't touch. At first I was going to really duplicate Tron and have self-intersection be illegal, but that's a little weird in a continuous game because the position you're currently at becomes illegal for all intents and purposes. So, only touching the opponent's path is illegal.

  I didn't want to keep a Model in this hack -- all the data's on the canvas, so mutation and render are the same op. This makes a lot of sense since we aren't allowed to go back and erase old pixels, and it speeds up render by a lot.  What this means, though is that I couldn't draw everything on the same canvas, because then when overlaps occurred it started to matter whose color was drawn before whose (if we're always laying red down under us we could just skate over a blue line thinking it was red). Fixable, of course, but I wanted to get this hack done as fast as possible. So, I put the two lines on different canvases, and on every move I sampled the opposite canvas to test for a lose condition. This ended up being a good decision; it made the multiplayer element much easier.

  Okay, time to make it two-player. To be as pragmatic as possible, I tried to translate my one-player code one-to-one to two-player code. To do this I set up a simple websockets server that did nothing but pass keypress info between clients, and the clients would interpret the incoming keypresses appropriately (if client A gets 'left arrow' keypress from client B, it will act as if a local opponent had just pressed 'right arrow'). To preserve time-syncing, clients pass info in turns -- client A will stall the game until client B gets back to him. Unfortunately, this means that network lag becomes a big deal. But that's okay, on with the game.

  I ran into a couple issues with clients disagreeing about game data, and it had to do with weird pixel offsets with the canvas. So I decided to actually have the canvases be identical, and keypresses passed through verbatim, and just apply a 180-degree canvas transformation. That is, if client A gets 'left arrow' from client B, it will move B's pixel to the left. However, the canvas will have been matrix-transformed 180 degrees, so the pixel will in practice move to the right.

  Time to score the game. Your score will be the area accessible to you. We can do this with a simple BFS on the canvases.

## Launch
  I chose Heroku for my cloud hosting here, just 'cos it's free and supports websockets and nodejs. Heroku support for websockets is actually experimental, so this will not work on some systems.

[tron]: http://tron.aichallenge.org
