---
layout: post
title: "Drawtree"
tags:
- latin
- visualization
- browser
- coffeescript
- html5_canvas
---

{% include JB/setup %}

## Demo
[http://dabbler0.github.io/drawtree](http://dabbler0.github.io/drawtree)

## Conception
  This actually came from a homework assignment in my Latin class. We needed to draw the syntax tree for a Latin sentence. I wanted to type this, but there's no good software for rendering arbitrary trees. There are some overpowered tools like [Treeform][treeform], but they have all this clunky UI. I just want to write a gorram Lisp file and have you render the tree.

<!--more-->

## Tech

It's going to be a static webpage, written in CoffeeScript, on the HTML5 canvas. I am going to use, not Lisp, but my friend Sean Lee's [Tabdown][tabdown] sepcification for the tree syntax.
i
## Hack
  Okay, so I'm coming right out of doing abstract layouts with ICE editor. So the first thing to do is some OOP boilerplate -- `Nodes` of the tree. Each `Node` knows how to render itself, which will be a recursive process -- the only thing that really makes sense for trees. I wrote a simple parser for Sean's tabdown specification with little difficulty.

  Okay, time to render. Rendering will happen in two passes -- dimension computation and positional computation.

  *Dimension computation* The width of a tree is `max(the sum of the widths of its children, its root's label's width)`. Its height is a scalar times the depth of its deepest leaf (each tree "tier" has constant height).

  *Positional computation* We lay out a tree by placing all the children in a row underneath the root. Then, on draw, we'll draw a line from our root label to the root label of each of our children.

  A better visualization of this is clicking the "box" option instead of "graph" in the upper-left corner of the demo. It's a pretty simple layout algorithm.

  Great! We're done with little difficulty. Time to make some other parsers. I've been working on the ICE editor parser, and I know I would really benefit from seeing a visualization of the CoffeeScript parse tree of a program. So I made a CoffeeScript parser first, with little difficulty. What else? Oh, right, when I started I wanted Lisp. So I'll make a Lisp parser.

  I ran into some trouble making a Lisp parser, because what I wanted was a syntax tree, which I had convoluted ideas about at first. I wanted
{% highlight lisp %}
(+ a b)
{% endhighlight %}
  To render to
```
     +
    a b
```
  But this was faulty, because what do I do with this?

{% highlight lisp %}
((a b) (c d))
{% endhighlight %}

  Yep, so just made a node per paren and that was that. Then I wanted to get to the original intent of the program again and make something suitable for defining language syntax trees by hand. So I made up a language which I guess I'm calling "Tabs", which is meant to resemble the Penn Treebank or Brown Corpus tags, except, you know, not really. Anyway, just a bunch of parsers.

  Okay, time for some UI. My first iteration had the textarea occupying the left side of the screen and the graph occupying the right. But this is faulty because my layout algorithm tends to produce very wide trees. So then I put the graph on the bottom and the textarea on the top. But this is also faulty because I want to render some very deep trees. So then I decided to just have an "edit" mode, and a separate "view" mode, and got to where I am now.

## Launch
  It's a static page, so I'm using Github Pages to host this hack.

[treeform]: http://www.ece.ubc.ca/~donaldd/treeform.htm
[tabdown]: https://github.com/freshdried/tabdown
